---
layout: post
title: Fame
hn: http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=2545550
---

A patrician in ancient Rome might be able to make a name for himself around his
neighborhood over the course of his lifetime.

By the time the printing press gained widespread usage, an educated citizen
might be able to write to her newspaper and reach thousands over a few days.

Today, a tenth grader who perhaps may not be our finest societal achievement
judging from a cursory glance at her neck tattoo that proudly proclaims "To hot
4 you", drunkenly sits on her keyboard and mistakenly sends out a tweet that
six hundred thousand people read within the hour.

Does this blow your mind? Does it? Because **it should fucking blow your
mind**.

## Power

A thousand years ago, kings and emperors would kill to have this power. At no
other time in human history have even the richest, most famous humans been able
to wield the power your average teenager has access to on their iPhone today.

We've never been so closely networked before. Your tweet on Twitter isn't just
for your direct followers anymore... each of your followers is a click away
from broadcasting it to *their* followers. It's a simple concept, but let
that sink in. Every time someone retweets my blog post or my tweet or
something I've done, I'm being exposed to *their* followers, who in turn can
perpetuate the cycle.

Classic network effect. But that doesn't make it any less amazing.

## Fast Starts

It's remarkable how quickly this can happen. When [I wrote
Facelette][facelette], I had a good idea that it was going to go viral as soon
as I released it. I didn't even get that far, actually; my coworkers tweeted it
as soon as I pasted in the URL to our company chat, and within a couple minutes
it was clear I couldn't put it back in the bag. There were more than 2,500
tweets in the first 24 hours, and that all stemmed from those initial few
tweets.

I saw the same phenomena happen for my coworker [Corey Johnson][corey] when he
released [URL Hunter][probablygame], a simple game in your browser's URL bar.
Because of how easy word-of-mouth is today, he was getting thousands of tweets
about this little hack, which led to interviews in tech magazines and
lol-worthy acquisition inquiries. All from a simple idea and a human compulsion
to share cool shit.

Think about this stuff the next time you launch your product. Or tweet. Or post
a photo. It's good for you to stop being so goddamn jaded and realize that
we've built a fucking awesome society.

[facelette]: http://zachholman.com/2010/10/facelette-on-techcrunch-in-three-hours-and-zero-dollars/
[corey]: http://twitter.com/probablycorey
[probablygame]: http://probablyinteractive.com/url-hunter
