---
layout: post
title: Customer Support Doesn't Have to Suck
hn: http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=2971236
---

We all have this feeling that fielding support requests is a monotonous job we
ought to dread.

We shouldn't. It doesn't have to suck.

I was at a dinner in Boulder for the 2011 Rocky Mountain Ruby conference, and
Hoyt ([@jonmagic](http://twitter.com/jonmagic)) asked a simple question about
software support to a table-mate:

> When was the last time you did something particularly nice for a customer?

I don't think Hoyt intended this to be a particularly interesting or deep
question, but I think it's much more important that it looks on the surface.

## Support can substantially impact people

If you're in a position of supporting a product — answering emails, fixing
bugs, responding to people over Twitter — you are in a position to **improve
lives**. It sounds overly dramatic, but consider a support request:

- I want something that I currently can't attain in your product: a specific
  end result, a feature, a bug fixed, or sufficient in-product help so I can do
  it myself.
- This desire impacts me emotionally: if I'm helped, I will be happy, or I'll
  avoid feeling frustrated, or I'll be impressed.

The second aspect is most important. Support requests are almost always tied to
emotion, even if the asker doesn't herself believe it. A lot of the time,
addressing someone's concerns is as much about protecting against future
frustrations rather than improving today's complacency. Fixing someone's bug
may only lead to a three-second "oh good, they fixed that" response, but that
short-lived relief *is* relief. Do that enough times, and you turn customers
into happy customers. Do it consistently and frequently, and your happy
customers turn into devoted customers.

## Going over the top

Hoyt's question was more about what happens if you go "over the top". Are you
just going to give your customer a paste of steps they can take to fix their
problem? Can you spend some time and give them an executable script? Can you
manually go into the database to do it yourself so they don't have to lift a
finger?

Do they have a completely, irrationally-involved support request you usually
blow off? Can you fully address it at least one time this month?

Can you read between the lines and recognize someone's actual desires before
they do? If they're asking for *x*, give them *5x*. Go over the top. Lose money
on it. Waste time on it. Don't do it for the marketing exposure: **do it
because you can make someone happy**. If they tweet or blog about it, great,
but if that's the primary reason you're doing it, they'll know. Do it for the
right reasons.

We're limited by time. We're limited by money. "Over the top" support responses
may only be feasible in your company every few weeks. Or months. Or even more.
But there will be times where it *is* possible. When that happens, consider
whether you can help. In most cases, the other party won't even notice the
lengths you've went to. That's okay. Over time, *people will notice*.

All too often we forget that many companies aren't built primarily to make
money: they're built to solve problems. Money is the intended side-effect of
that. Connect with customers emotionally and you'll start seeing happier
humans.
