---
layout: post
title: "How GitHub Works: Hours are Bullshit"
hn: http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=2892409
---

<div class="aside">

  You're reading part one of <strong><a href="/posts/how-github-works">How
  GitHub Works</a></strong>, a three-post journey into how we work at GitHub.
  They're all separate posts on different topics, but if you're interested you
  can also read the other two: <a
  href="/posts/how-github-works-asynchronous/">Be Asynchronous</a> and <a
  href="/posts/how-github-works-creativity/">Creativity is Important</a>.

</div>

Frederick Winslow Taylor wrote the seminal analysis of management and
efficiency in 1911 with *[The Principles of Scientific Management][taylor]*. He
took the first scientific approach towards maximizing efficiency in
manufacturing jobs. Time is money. Faster is better. More hours are better.

## Hours are bullshit

Hours are great ways to determine productivity in many industries, but not
ours. Working in a startup is a much different experience than working in a
factory. You can't throw more time at a problem and expect it to get solved.
**Code is a creative endeavor**. You need to be in the right mindset to create
high-quality code.

Think back to the last time you were depressed or angry. How productive were
you? Now think back to the last time you were truly productive. Code flying
from your fingertips. Not just the sheer quantity- the sheer *quality* of that
code. When you're in the right mindset, your best day of coding can trump weeks
of frustrated keyboard-tapping.

We want employees to be in the zone as often as possible. Mandating specific
times they need to be in the office hurts the chances of that. Forcing me in
the office at 9am will never, ever get me in the zone, but half of GitHub may
very well work *best* in the morning.

By allowing for a more flexible work schedule, you create an atmosphere where
employees can be excited about their work. Ultimately it should lead to *more*
hours of work, with those hours being even *more* productive. Working weekends
blur into working nights into working weekdays, since none of the work *feels*
like work.

## A day

Everyone at GitHub is different. I don't really have an "average" day, but this
is a close approximation:

  - Wake up around 10am, check Campfire logs, clear overnight support tickets
  - Bus into work and grab lunch around noon or 1
  - Work from 1pm to somewhere around 6-9pm at the office
  - Go home and work/relax from my couch until 2am, or:
  - Go out and drink with coworkers (more on this later)

We have a contingent of (insane) people who come into work around 7am, we have
some who come in at 3pm. We have some who are more productive at home. You
don't have to come into the office every day if you don't feel like it
(although most of the time everyone comes in).

Why is our day so "loose"? Because 1) working in chat rooms lets us work when
and where we want, and 2) we want to create an environment where people are
most productive.  There's no one work day that fits everyone's productive
hours, so we don't enforce one.

## Enforcement

We're currently at 35 employees and growing, and this approach still works
great. But managers love to assign hours for a reason: it gives them the
illusion that hours can measure performance.

If you don't go hard on hours, you do have to look at different metrics. How
good is their code? Are they fixing bugs? Are they involved in work, or is the
greater flexibility not motivating them?

It's difficult to make these qualitative judgements, but they're still going to
be more valuable than "did this guy put in his ten hours of work today".
Because as soon as you make it about hours, their job becomes less about code
and more about hours.

[taylor]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Principles_of_Scientific_Management
